# fasta_maker_pipeline

Extracts sequences generated by `mixcr_pipeline.py` and stores them in a universal **FASTA** file. 
This pipeline provides functions and a specific workflow to extract sequences by chain identity.
This pipeline assumes a project directory like the one created by `mixcr_pipeline.py`.

## Table of Contents

- [Usage](#usage)
- [Output](#output)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Usage

To run `fasta_maker.py`:

1. Activate `rl_bnab_maturation_pathways` conda environment.

```Bash
    # To activate conda environment:
    conda activate rl_bnab_maturation_pathways
```

2. Now you can run the python file.

```Bash
    # To run sequence_selection.py
    python3 fasta_maker.py <path_to_clones_dir>
```

The path to the clones directory is a required positional argument. This is the directory where clonotypes have been generated using MiXCR analyze. This file is assumes that this directory has an equivalent structure to that created by `mixcr_pipeline.py`.


Other arguments include:

- `--chains`: specifies the chains to be stored in fasta file.

Please run the following for more details on expected input for each argument:

```Bash
    python3 fasta_maker.py --help
```

A sample run:

```Bash
    python3 fasta_maker.py /path/to/clones \
                     --chains IGK IGH \
                    
```

## Output 

`fasta_maker.py` generates a **FASTA** file in the clones directory which contains sequences for all
timepoints with the specified chains. Note that `fasta_maker.py` filters out sequence reads with uncovered
regions.

The output file is named as follows:
```Bash
chains-<chain_id_1>-<chain_id_2>-<etc>_clones.fasta
```



## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these guidelines for contributions:

- Fork the repository
- Create a new branch: `git checkout -b feature-name`
- Make your changes and commit them: `git commit -m 'Description of changes'`
- Push to the branch: `git push origin feature-name`
- Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).