# seqeuence_selection_pipeline

Extracts representative sequences from those generated by `mixcr_pipeline.py`. This pipeline assumes a project directory like the one created by `mixcr_pipeline.py`.

## Table of Contents

- [Usage](#usage)
- [Workflow](#workflow)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Usage

To run `sequence_selection.py`:

1. Activate `rl_bnab_maturation_pathways` conda environment.

```Bash
    # To activate conda environment:
    conda activate rl_bnab_maturation_pathways
```

2. Now you can run the python file.

```Bash
    # To run sequence_selection.py
    python3 sequence_selection.py <path_to_data_dir>
```

The path to the data directory is a required positional argument. This is the directory where project files have been downloaded and processed using MiXCR and stored in sqlite3 database. It is assumes that this directory has an equivalent structure to that created by `mixcr_pipeline.py`.

> **Note:** The path to the data directory **must be an absolute path.**

This is necessary to ensure that files are written to the correct directories created relative to the data directory. 

Other arguments include:

- `--dataset`: this is name of the project.
- `--database`: this is the name of the sqlite3 database storing relevant data, including extension.
- `--peptide`: uses the peptide sequence to perform subsequent analysis
- `--nucleotide`: uses the nucleotide sequence to perform subsequent analysis. Note that LLM embeddings are not available for nucleotides.
> Note that '--peptide' and '--nucleotide' options can NOT be enabled simultaneously.
- `--selection-critera`: specifies which features will be used to extract sequences. One case where this might be useful if the subsequent analysis will be performed on only a specific timepoint or chain of interest.
- `--cluster`: enables cluster mode. Sequences will be clustered to extract representative. If not enabled, sequences will be randomly selected.
- `--sample-size`: extracts `sample-size` representative sequences.

Please run the following for more details on expected input for each argument:

```Bash
    python3 sequence_selection.py --help
```

A sample run:

```Bash
    python3 sequence_selection.py /path/to/data \
                     --dataset RV217_40512 \
                     --selection-criteria day:day240 chain:igh \
                     --fields days \
                     --download-list \path\to\download-list.txt \

```


## Workflow

`sequence_selection.py` extracts representative sequences from a series of nucleotide or protein sequences.

Assumes the following directory structure:
<pre>
.
└── data/
    ├── &ltproject_title&gt/
    │   ├── &ltproject_title>.db
    │   ├── raw/
    │   │   ├── download-list.txt
    │   │   ├── &ltrep_id&gt/
    │   │   │   ├── &ltrep_id&gt_R1.fastq.gz
    │   │   │   └── &ltrep_id&gt_R2.fastq.gz
    │   │   └── ... 
    │   └── clones/
    │       ├── &ltrep_id&gt/
    │       │   └── &ltrep_id&gt_clones.tsv
    │       └── ...
    └── ...
</pre>

### Step 1: Download Raw Files

`mixcr_pipeline.py` sets up the `raw` directory by copying the download text file onto `download-list.txt`. Then, it will use `aria2c` download utility to optimize and fail-proof file downloads. `mixcr_pipeline.py` will fork a subprocess to attempt download up to 10 times, and quit upon more than 10 failures.

### Step 2: Create Clones Directory

`mixcr_pipeline.py` sets up the `clones` directory by creating all `<rep_id>` the folders in `raw`. These folders remain empty until MiXCR commands.

### Step 3. Run Alignments and Assemble

`mixcr_pipeline.py` runs alignments of the nucleotide sequences with known CD3 and VDJ gene regions in human species. It will then assemble contiguous clonotypes using these alignments. Alignment and assemble are ran in a single step using `MiXCR`, a software tool designed for the analysis of T-cell receptor (TCR) and B-cell receptor (BCR) repertoires. `mixcr_pipeline.py` will run alignment and assemble in batches of 6 repertoires, where each repertoire is started in its own process, thus increasing execution speed by executing them in parallel. Alignments are stored in each repertoire's respective `raw` directory.

> Execution time expectation is 10 to 15 minutes per batch.

### Step 4. Export Clones

Similar to step 3, `mixcr_pipeline.py` uses parallelized processes to extract assembled contiguous antibody sequences. These are stored in each repertoires respective directory within the `clones` directory, signified by their `<rep_id>`.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these guidelines for contributions:

- Fork the repository
- Create a new branch: `git checkout -b feature-name`
- Make your changes and commit them: `git commit -m 'Description of changes'`
- Push to the branch: `git push origin feature-name`
- Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
